# Taints, Toleration and NodeAffinity

- pods are automatically assigned to nodes by the scheduler
- scheduler decides intelligently where to place the pods
- if you want to assign a pod to a specific node, you can use `nodeSelector` field, `nodeAffinity` field or `taints and tolerations` field in the pod definition file.

## 1. NodeSelector Field

- **nodeSelector** field in the pod definition file specifies a map of key-value pairs. For the pod to be eligible to run on a node, the node must have each of the indicated key-value pairs as labels.
- The pod is eligible to run on a node only if the node has the labels specified in the **nodeSelector** field of the pod definition file.
- The **nodeSelector** field is used to assign a pod to a specific node.

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: myapp-pod
spec:
  containers:
    - name: nginx-container
      image: nginx
  nodeSelector:
    size: Large
```

## 2. NodeAffinity Field

- **nodeAffinity** field in the pod definition file specifies rules that are used to constrain the scheduling of a pod to a node.
- The rules are defined using a **nodeAffinity** object that contains `requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution` and `preferredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution` fields.
- The `requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution` field specifies the rules that must be met for the pod to be scheduled on a node.
- The `preferredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution` field specifies the rules that should be met for the pod to be scheduled on a node.

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: myapp-pod
spec:
  containers:
    - name: nginx-container
      image: nginx
  affinity:
    nodeAffinity:
      requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution:
        nodeSelectorTerms:
          - matchExpressions:
              - key: size
                operator: In
                values:
                  - Large
                  - Medium
      preferredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution:
        - weight: 1
          preference:
            matchExpressions:
              - key: size
                operator: In
                values:
                  - X-Large
```

## 3. Taints and Tolerations Field

- **taints** are used to repel pods from a node.
- **taints** are rules that are applied to nodes.
- **tolerations** are used to allow pods to be scheduled on a node with a taint.
- **tolerations** are rules that are applied to pods.
- **taints** and **tolerations** are used to assign a pod to a specific node.

### Example 1

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: pod-with-toleration
  labels:
    app: myapp
spec:
  containers:
    - name: nginx-container
      image: nginx
  tolerations:
    - effect: NoExecute
      operator: Exists
  nodeName: master
```

1. **Scheduled on Node Named `master`**:

   - The `nodeName: master` field forces the Pod to be scheduled on the node with the name `master`, regardless of other scheduling considerations like taints and tolerations.

2. **Tolerations and Taints**:
   - The toleration specified (`effect: NoExecute` and `operator: Exists`) means that the Pod can tolerate any taint with the `NoExecute` effect. Normally, a Pod without a matching toleration would be evicted from a node with a `NoExecute` taint.
   - This means that if the `master` node has any `NoExecute` taints, this Pod will still be scheduled on it and will not be evicted.

### Example 2

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: myapp-pod
spec:
  containers:
    - name: nginx-container
      image: nginx
  tolerations:
    - key: "app"
      operator: "Equal"
      value: "blue"
      effect: "NoSchedule"
```

The tolerations field is used to specify tolerations for the Pod. Tolerations allow the Pod to be scheduled on nodes with specific taints. Taints are used to repel Pods from certain nodes, while tolerations are used to attract Pods to specific nodes.

1. **key**: The key is set to "app". This is a custom key that can be used to match taints on nodes.

2. **operator**: The operator is set to "Equal". This means that the value of the taint key on the node must be equal to the value specified in the toleration for the Pod to be scheduled on that node.

3. **value**: The value is set to "blue". This is the value that the taint key on the node must have for the toleration to match.

4. **effect**: The effect is set to "NoSchedule". This means that if the toleration matches a taint on a node, the Pod will not be scheduled on that node.

## 4. Inter-Pod Affinity and Anti-Affinity

- allows you to constrain, which nodes your pod is eligible to be scheduled based on labels on pods that are already running on the node rather than based on labels on nodes.

### Example 1

imagine if our app works with etcd, and etcd is scheduled on just 2 of 3 master nodes and we want to schedule our app on those nodes that etcd is running on them.

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: myapp-deployment
spec:
  replicas: 3
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: myapp
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: myapp
    spec:
      containers:
        - name: nginx-container
          image: nginx
      affinity:
        podAffinity:
          requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution:
            - labelSelector:
                matchExpressions:
                  - key: app
                    operator: In
                    values:
                      - etcd
              topologyKey: "kubernetes.io/hostname"
```

## Conclusion

- **nodeSelector** field is used to assign a pod to a specific node.
- **nodeAffinity** field is used to constrain the scheduling of a pod to a node based on rules.
- **taints and tolerations** field is used to assign a pod to a specific node based on taints and tolerations.
- **Inter-Pod Affinity and Anti-Affinity** allows you to constrain which nodes your pod is eligible to be scheduled based on labels on pods that are already running on the node.
