# Understand Microsoft Entra ID

**After this module, you should be able to:**

1. Describe Microsoft Entra ID.
2. Compare Microsoft Entra ID to Active Directory Domain Services (AD DS).
3. Describe how Microsoft Entra ID is used as a directory for cloud apps.
4. Describe Microsoft Entra ID P1 and P2.
5. Describe Microsoft Entra Domain Services.

**What is Entra ID:**

Microsoft Entra ID is a comprehensive solution for managing identities, enforcing access policies, and securing your applications and data in the cloud and on-premises.

Microsoft Entra ID is part of the platform as a service (PaaS) offering and operates as a Microsoft-managed directory service in the cloud.

> ❕Note  
> By default, when you create a new Azure subscription by using a Microsoft account, the subscription automatically includes a new Microsoft Entra tenant named Default Directory.

**Entra ID default Domain Name System (DNS):**

Each Microsoft Entra tenant is assigned the default Domain Name System (DNS) domain name, consisting of a unique prefix. The prefix, derived from the name of the Microsoft account you use to create an Azure subscription or provided explicitly when creating a Microsoft Entra tenant, is followed by the `onmicrosoft.com` suffix. Adding at least one custom domain name to the same Microsoft Entra tenant is possible and common.

**What is AD (AD DS):**

Active Directory Domain Services (AD DS or traditionally called just "Active Directory"). AD DS is a directory service that provides the methods for storing directory data, such as user accounts and passwords, and makes this data available to network users, administrators, and other devices and services. It runs as a service on Windows Server, referred to as a domain controller.

With Microsoft Entra ID, you also have access to a set of features that aren’t natively available in AD DS, such as support for **multi-factor authentication**, **identity protection**, and **self-service password reset**.
