# Namespaces in Kubernetes

## What are Namespaces?

Namespaces in Kubernetes provide a way to divide cluster resources among multiple users and create virtual clusters within a physical cluster. Names of resources need to be unique within a namespace but not across namespaces, enabling environments like dev, test, and prod to coexist without name conflicts.

## Why Use Namespaces?

- **Isolation**: Separate environments (e.g., dev, test, prod).
- **Resource Management**: Manage resources and quotas for teams or projects.
- **Security**: Apply access controls to enhance security.
- **Organization**: Logically organize resources within the cluster.

## Creating and Using Namespaces

Creating a namespace:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Namespace
metadata:
  name: development
```

Apply the namespace:

```sh
kubectl apply -f namespace.yaml
```

Specify a namespace for a resource:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: my-pod
  namespace: development
spec:
  containers:
    - name: my-container
      image: nginx
```

Create resources within a specific namespace using the `--namespace` flag:

```sh
kubectl create -f pod.yaml --namespace=development
```

## Examples

1. **Creating a Namespace**:

   ```sh
   kubectl create namespace development
   ```

2. **Deploying a Pod in a Namespace**:

   ```yaml
   apiVersion: v1
   kind: Pod
   metadata:
     name: my-pod
     namespace: development
   spec:
     containers:
       - name: my-container
         image: nginx
   ```

   ```sh
   kubectl apply -f pod.yaml
   ```

3. **Switching Between Namespaces**:

   ```sh
   kubectl config set-context --current --namespace=development
   ```

## Default Namespaces

1. **default**:

   - **Purpose**: Default namespace for objects without a specified namespace.
   - **Use Case**: General-purpose; resources created without a namespace go here.

2. **kube-system**:

   - **Purpose**: Contains objects created by the Kubernetes system.
   - **Use Case**: System components like the API server, scheduler, and controller manager.

3. **kube-public**:

   - **Purpose**: Readable by all users, including unauthenticated ones.
   - **Use Case**: Resources that should be publicly accessible.

4. **kube-node-lease**:
   - **Purpose**: Holds lease objects associated with each node, aiding in node health checks.
   - **Use Case**: Used for node heartbeats to improve node failure detection performance.

## Managing Namespaces

- **List all namespaces**:

  ```sh
  kubectl get namespaces
  ```

- **Describe a namespace**:

  ```sh
  kubectl describe namespace development
  ```

- **Delete a namespace**:

  ```sh
  kubectl delete namespace development
  ```

## Summary of `kubens`

`kubens` is a command-line tool that simplifies switching between Kubernetes namespaces. It enhances the `kubectl` experience by providing an easy way to change the current namespace context.

### Features

1. **Quick Switching**: Easily switch between namespaces.
2. **Namespace Listing**: Lists all available namespaces.
3. **Interactive Mode**: Allows selecting the desired namespace interactively.
4. **Integration**: Works seamlessly with `kubectl`.

### Installation

- **Using Homebrew**: `brew install kubectx`
- **From Source**: Download and move the binary to a directory in your `$PATH`.

### Usage

- **List namespaces**: `kubens`
- **Switch namespace**: `kubens <namespace-name>`

#### Example

1. List all namespaces:

   ```sh
   kubens
   ```

2. Switch to the `development` namespace:

   ```sh
   kubens development
   ```

3. Switch back to the previous namespace:

   ```sh
   kubens -
   ```

### Benefits

1. **Efficiency**: Reduces the number of commands needed.
2. **Convenience**: Avoids repetitive typing of namespace names.
3. **Productivity**: Enhances productivity by quick access to different namespaces.
4. **Clarity**: Keeps the current namespace context clear.

## Notes

- you can't access resources in a namespace from another namespace except services.
- you can access services in another namespace by using the service name and the namespace name.
  - e.g., `my-service.my-namespace.svc.cluster.local`.
- volumes and nodes are cluster-wide resources and not bound to a namespace.

## Benefits and Best Practices

1. **Organize Resources**: Separate environments or teams.
2. **Resource Quotas**: Control resource usage with quotas.
3. **Access Control**: Manage access with RBAC (Role-Based Access Control).
4. **Avoid Overusing**: Keep the number of namespaces manageable.
